---
aliases:
  - ideal gas law
  - ideal gas
  - perfect gas
---
Describes the behavior of gases under certain theoretical conditions.

An **ideal (or perfect) gas** is defined by having **low density** and **short-range forces**, which means that particles that are far apart do not interact significantly.

For $n$ moles of an ideal gas, at a given volume $V$ and pressure $p$, the law is expressed as:

$$\Large pV = nRT$$

Where:

- $p$ is the **pressure** of the gas.
- $V$ is the **volume** occupied by the gas.
- $n$ is the **number of moles** of the gas.
- $R$ is the **universal gas constant**, which has a value of $8.314 \text{ J/(mol}\cdot\text{K)}$. It can also be expressed in other units, such as $0.082 \text{ l}\cdot\text{atm}$.
- $T$ is the **absolute temperature** of the gas, measured in Kelvin.

An **equivalent expression** of the ideal gas law, relating to the total number of constituent particles, is:

$$\Large pV = Nk_BT$$

Where:

- $N$ is the **total number of constituent particles** (atoms or molecules) in the gas.
- $k_B$ is the **Boltzmann constant**, which is derived as $R/N_A$, with an approximate value of $1.38 \cdot 10^{-23} \text{ J/K}$.
- $N_A$ is **Avogadro's number**, which is $6.022 \cdot 10^{23}$ constituent particles per mole.

> [!hint] **Moles** 
> One mole of any substance is defined as the amount of that substance that contains Avogadro's number of constituent particles.

> [!note] Temperature definition
> From the **kinetic theory of gases**, by comparing the kinetic-theory-derived pressure equation ($p = \frac{1}{3} \frac{N}{V} m \bar{v^2}$) with the ideal gas law ($pV = Nk_BT$), it is deduced that **temperature is a direct measure of the average molecular kinetic energy**. Specifically, this relationship can be expressed as $T = \frac{2}{3} \frac{1}{k_B} (\frac{1}{2} m \bar{v^2})$.
