$$\large HALT_{TM} = \{⟨M,w⟩\;| \;M\underbracket{\text{ halts on input }}_{\text{accepts or rejects}}w\}$$
We show that this problem is undecidable by contradiction.

> [!hint]
> There is no turing machine that given the input $⟨M,w⟩$, can decide whether $M$ halts on $w$ or not.
> 
> > [!example]
> > You have two machines, one gets the input $w$, and the other must determine whether the first machine will stop or loop forever. 
> > We show that the first machine can't always exist.


Assume we have this first machine $R$, which decides $HALT_{TM}$ (can determine whether the second machine halts or not).

We try to build a decider for:

$$\large A_{TM} = \{⟨M,w⟩\;| \;M\text{ accepts input }w\}$$

We do it by using $R$:
1. First, we check if $M$ even halts or if it loops forever.

> [!hint]
> If $M$ loops forever on $w$, it means that $M$ doesn't accept $w$.

2. If $R$ rejects (it doesn't halt), then $w$ is not in the language of $M$ because it loops. So we instantly reject.
3. Since we are at this step, $R$ determined that $M$ doesn't halt on $w$, so we run $M$ on $w$ to determine whether it accepts or rejects.

> [!hint]
> We can run the simulation without any danger of looping.

4. Output what $M$ outputs on $w$.

> [!hint] This is actually a reduction proof
> What we have actually shown is that we can reduce $HALT_{TM}$ to $A_{TM}$, which we already know is undecidable.


So basically, if there exists such an $R$ (that can decide whether $M$ halts or not) we can necessarily decide $A_{TM}$. But we already know that $A_{TM}$ is undecidable, so no such $R$ can exist.


### Conclusion

There is no program that can decide whether a Turing machine will halt on a specific input.


